# Omega: A Hardware-Software Framework for Complete Design Space Exploration of FPGA-Based Heterogeneous Multi-Core SoCs

The design space exploration (DSE) of heterogeneous multi-core systems-on-chip (SoCs)
presents a massive challenge due to the vast and complex configuration space,
demanding simultaneous optimization of performance, energy efficiency,
and resource utilization under diverse constraints.
Traditional approaches leveraging analytical models, heuristics,
and machine learning (ML) techniques fail to comprehensively cover this space,
often yielding suboptimal solutions.
The Omega framework, designed for exhaustive DSE of FPGA-based heterogeneous multi-core SoCs,
addresses the former limitations by fully exploring the design space and
guaranteeing the identification of globally optimal configurations.
Omega leverages FPGAs' dynamic partial reconfiguration to accelerate the DSE drastically and
can serve as a golden model for evaluating novel DSE heuristics and ML methods.
This manuscript demonstrates the proposed framework’s effectiveness through
an extensive experimental campaign on 16-core SoCs with accelerators for up to five different applications,
achieving a substantial speedup, of 29 times on average, compared to
traditional techniques while ensuring solution optimality.
Omega is released as a comprehensive open-source ecosystem,
compatible with commercially available FPGA platforms, to facilitate future research and practical adoption,
setting a new benchmark for DSE methodologies and providing
a robust tool for optimizing next-generation computing platforms.

## Repository organization

Here is a brief description of the main directories in the repository,
please refer to the READMEs inside each of them for more information.

* `accelerators` contains multiple accelerator design and integration
  flows, as well as many example accelerators.

* `constraints` contains the constraints and attributes for each
  supported FPGA board (or ASIC technology).

* `socs` contains the working folders for launching all Make targets.
  There is one working folder for each supported FPGA board (or ASIC
  technology).

* `rtl` contains the whole RTL code base, excluding the accelerators
  RTL and the RTL generated in the working folder by the SoCGen and
  SocketGen tools.

* `soft` contains bootloader, Linux kernel and root file system, and
  bare-metal library for each of the available processor cores. It
  also contains bare-metal, user space and kernel space libraries for
  invoking and managing accelerators.

* `tech` is the destination of the RTL generated by the HLS-based and
  Chisel-based accelerator design flows. It is also the destination of
  the RTL generated with HLS for the SystemC implementation of the
  cache hierarchy. The generated RTL is organized based on the target
  FPGA (or ASIC) technology.

* `tools` contains tools for design automation and for communicating
  with an Omega SoC from a host machine.

* `utils` contains various scripts and utilities, including the main
  Makefiles, the RTL file lists, and the software toolchains
  installation scripts.

* `.cache` caches some compiled libraries so they only need to be
  compiled once (e.g. Xilinx simulation libraries).


## Get started

The Omega framework is based on the open-source SoC prototyping platform
ESP. The main commands are identical, so please refer to
their [Documentation page](https://www.esp.cs.columbia.edu/docs/) for a
tutorial on how to get started with this framework. The more advanced techniques
for DSE can be retrieved under the `tools/dse` folder.


## Publications

Omega is presented in our overview paper:

> Gabriele Montanaro, Andrea Galimberti, and Davide Zoni, _"Omega: A Hardware-Software
> Framework for Complete Design Space Exploration of FPGA-Based Heterogeneous
> Multi-Core SoCs,"_ in IEEE Transactions on Computers

DOI: [10.1109/TC.2025.362470](10.1109/TC.2025.362470)

If you have used Omega in your research, you can cite us:

```
@ARTICLE{11216106,
  author={Montanaro, Gabriele and Galimberti, Andrea and Zoni, Davide},
  journal={IEEE Transactions on Computers},
  title={Omega: A Hardware-Software Framework for Complete Design Space Exploration of FPGA-Based Heterogeneous Multi-Core SoCs},
  year={2025},
  volume={},
  number={},
  pages={1-13},
  keywords={Field programmable gate arrays;Space exploration;Hardware acceleration;Optimization;Computer architecture;Computers;Central Processing Unit;Binary sequences;Multicore processing;Logic;design space exploration;system-on-chip;heterogeneous;multi-core;FPGA;dynamic partial reconfiguration},
  doi={10.1109/TC.2025.3624704}}
```
